#summary eID Card Authentication
#sidebar TableOfContents

=eID Card Authentication=

==Introduction==

The eID card allows for two basic operations, namely simple digital
identification of the card holder, and the creation of digital signatures.
During an eID identification we simply read out the identity files of the
citizen's eID card.  Two types of digital signatures are supported: (1)
provide entity authentication via the private authentication key and
corresponding certificate chain, and (2) to provide electronic signatures
using the private non-repudiation key and corresponding certificate chain.
Digital signatures are created according to the PKCS#1v1.5 standard.

Because the private keys cannot be copied from the card, one has the
guarantee that authentication operations have been performed using the
genuine eID card of the citizen. The PIN verification also assures us that
the operation took place with the user's consent. Especially for
non-repudiation signatures this is the case as the citizen has to enter
the PIN code upon each signature generation.  This is very important from
a legal point of view for the creation of electronic signatures.

Looking at it from another point-of-view, one could state that the
creation of a digital signature leads to two cryptographic primitives.
One is entity authentication, and the other one is card authentication. On
the other hand, when performing an identification, card authentication can
be verified using the third private key of an eID card, namely the private
basic key.  Unfortunately this form of card authentication requires the
availability of the corresponding public key, and this is only known to
the eID card issuer, namely the National Register.  This card
authentication allows for the detection of eID card cloning.  eID card
authentication should be possible with the eID card to allow for a truly
secure eID identification.  The existing basic key pair can be used
without PIN verification. The only thing that needs to change is the
availability of the corresponding public key via the eID card itself.

==Implementations==

We describe two possible implementations. None of the proposed implementations require a change in the PKCS#15 structure of the eID card.

===Implementation via public key and reference in identity file===

The easiest way to make this information available is by including an
additional file in the eID card's file structure that holds this public
basic key, and by including the hash value of this key in the identity
file.  The same principle has already been applied to protect the
integrity of the citizen's picture on the eID card.

This feature does not jeopardize any of the existing card management
authentication schemes.

As for the implementation of this eID clone detection scheme, it should be
possible to issue eID cards that have the additional file with the public
basic key (and the corresponding hash in the identity file).

First the application reads out the identity file, corresponding identity
signature file, RRN certificate, authentication certificate, Citizen CA
certificate, and the Root CA. The application verifies the signature over
the identity file using the RRN certificate. Then the application verifies
the validity of the RRN certificate chain (full PKI validation). Next the
application verifies whether the national number within the identity file
corresponds with the national number within the authentication
certificate. Next the application verifies the authentication certificate
chain for validity (full PKI validation). Next the application check
whether the authentication certificate was issued after a certain date at
which eID cards with this additional file came into production. If so, the
application reads out the file with the basic public key (which indeed
should be present). It verifies whether the public basic key's hash value
corresponds with the value retrieved from the identity file. Subsequently,
a challenge is sent to the eID card and the resulting signature is
verified using the public basic key.

===Implementation via a card certificate===

Another option is to make the public basic key available via an X509 certificate structure. The main advantage of using a card certificate is that developers can more easily read out an X509 certificate than they do a DER encoded public key. Another advantage is that you don't need to change the identity file structure (no need to introduce a new tag). This card certificate would just contain the public basic key and should be signed by the RRN certificate. This implies that this card certificate is not a real certificate in the PKI sense and thus does not need to be generated by the eID PKI CA. The card certificate cannot be revoked. No additional cost is induced. During eID card personalization the RRN certificate need to sign one additional structure besides the identity and address files. To be able to link this card certificate with the card holder, the distinguished name of the card certificate should be similar to that of the authentication certificate, except that it should end with "(Card)" instead of "(Authentication)".

The eID Card cloning detection scheme is quite similar to that of the first proposed implementation.

First the application reads out the identity file, corresponding identity
signature file, RRN certificate, authentication certificate, Citizen CA
certificate, and the Root CA. The application verifies the signature over
the identity file using the RRN certificate. Then the application verifies
the validity of the RRN certificate chain (full PKI validation). Next the
application verifies whether the national number within the identity file
corresponds with the national number within the authentication
certificate. Next the application verifies the authentication certificate
chain for validity (full PKI validation). Next the application check
whether the authentication certificate was issued after a certain date at
which eID cards with this additional file came into production. If so, the
application reads out the card certificate file with the basic public key (which indeed
should be present). It verifies whether the card certificate has been signed by the RRN certificate. It verifies whether the national number within the card certificate corresponds with the national number retrieved from the identity file. Subsequently,
a challenge is sent to the eID card and the resulting signature is verified using the public basic key.