<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
	xmlns:ui="http://java.sun.com/jsf/facelets"
	xmlns:h="http://java.sun.com/jsf/html"
	xmlns:rich="http://richfaces.org/rich"
	xmlns:f="http://java.sun.com/jsf/core">
<body>
<ui:composition template="/WEB-INF/template.xhtml">
	<ui:param name="activeMenu" value="test" />
	<ui:define name="body">
		<h2>eID Applet Tests</h2>
		<p>Via this page you can test for correct functionality of the eID
		Applet within your web browser.</p>
		<rich:panel>
			<f:facet name="header">eID Applet Identification</f:facet>
			This test will execute an eID identification via the eID Applet.
			A simple eID readout will take place.
			<p><a
				href="#{facesContext.externalContext.requestContextPath}/identification.seam">Click
			here to run the eID Applet Identification test.</a></p>
		</rich:panel>
		<rich:spacer height="10" />
		<rich:panel>
			<f:facet name="header">eID Applet Authentication</f:facet>
			This test will execute an eID authentication via the eID Applet.
			This test requires you to enter your PIN code.
			<p><a
				href="#{facesContext.externalContext.requestContextPath}/authentication.seam">Click
			here to run the eID Applet Authentication test.</a></p>
		</rich:panel>
		<rich:spacer height="10" />
		<rich:panel>
			<f:facet name="header">eID Applet Authentication - Kiosk Mode</f:facet>
			This test will execute an eID authentication via the eID Applet.
			This test requires you to enter your PIN code.
			The eID Applet kiosk mode features detection of eID card removal.
			<p><a
				href="#{facesContext.externalContext.requestContextPath}/authentication-kiosk.seam">Click
			here to run the eID Applet Authentication (Kiosk Mode) test.</a></p>
		</rich:panel>
		<rich:spacer height="10" />
		<rich:panel>
			<f:facet name="header">eID Applet ODF Signature</f:facet>
			This test will execute an eID Signature creation via the eID Applet.
			The demonstrated signature format is ODF.
			The ODF signature format is also supported by 
			<a href="http://www.openoffice.org/" target="_blank">OpenOffice.org</a> version 3.1.
			<p><a
				href="#{facesContext.externalContext.requestContextPath}/upload-odf.seam">Click
			here to run the eID Applet Signature test.</a></p>
		</rich:panel>
	</ui:define>
</ui:composition>
</body>
</html>