<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
	xmlns:ui="http://java.sun.com/jsf/facelets"
	xmlns:h="http://java.sun.com/jsf/html"
	xmlns:rich="http://richfaces.org/rich"
	xmlns:f="http://java.sun.com/jsf/core"
        lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<body>
<ui:composition template="/WEB-INF/template.xhtml">
	<ui:param name="activeMenu" value="test" />
	<ui:define name="body">
		<h2>eID Applet Tests</h2>
		<p>Via this page you can test the eID Applet within your web
		browser.</p>
		<h:panelGrid columns="2">
			<rich:panel>
				<f:facet name="header">eID Applet Identification</f:facet>
			This test will perform an eID identification using the eID Applet.
			A simple eID data readout will take place.
			<p><a
					href="#{facesContext.externalContext.requestContextPath}/identification.seam">Click
				here to run the eID Applet Identification test.</a></p>
			</rich:panel>

			<rich:panel>
				<f:facet name="header">eID Applet Authentication</f:facet>
			This test will perform an eID authentication using the eID Applet.
			This test requires you to enter your eID PIN code.
			<p><a
					href="#{facesContext.externalContext.requestContextPath}/authentication.seam">Click
				here to run the eID Applet Authentication test.</a></p>
			</rich:panel>

			<rich:panel>
				<f:facet name="header">eID Applet ODF Signature</f:facet>
			This test will execute an eID Signature creation using the eID Applet.
			This test requires you to enter your eID PIN code.
			The demonstrated signature format is the Open Document Format (ODF).
			The ODF signature format is also supported by 
			<a href="http://www.openoffice.org/" target="_blank">OpenOffice.org 3.2</a>.
			<p><a
					href="#{facesContext.externalContext.requestContextPath}/upload-odf.seam">Click
				here to run the eID Applet Signature test.</a></p>
			</rich:panel>

			<rich:panel>
				<f:facet name="header">eID Applet OOXML Signature</f:facet>
			This test will perform an eID Signature creation via the eID Applet.
			This test requires you to enter your eID PIN code.
			The demonstrated signature format is Office OpenXML (OOXML).
			The OOXML signature format is also supported by 
			<a href="http://office.microsoft.com/" target="_blank">MS-Office
				2007</a>.
			<p><a
					href="#{facesContext.externalContext.requestContextPath}/upload-ooxml.seam">Click
				here to run the eID Applet Signature test.</a></p>
			</rich:panel>
		</h:panelGrid>
	</ui:define>
</ui:composition>
</body>
</html>